README.md, before:

# Adding Code Coverage to Anchor Programs 🎯

This guide explains how to set up code coverage analysis for your Anchor program. 📊

## Prerequisites

Install llvm (preferably version 19+)

Ubuntu

```bash
sudo apt install llvm
```

MacOS

```bash
brew install llvm
```

## Setup Steps 🛠️

### 1. Add the solana-coverage crate to your program: 📦

```bash
cd programs/your_program
cargo add solana-coverage
```

### 2. Modify your program's `lib.rs` to include the coverage macro: 🔧

```rust
#[cfg(not(target_os = "solana"))]
mod coverage {
    use super::*;
    use anchor_lang::solana_program::{
        entrypoint::ProgramResult,
        program_stubs::{set_syscall_stubs, SyscallStubs},
    };
    solana_coverage::anchor_coverage!();
}

#[program]
pub mod my_anchor_program {
...
}
```

### 3. [OPTIONAL] For third-party program binaries (if using CPI) create (if missing) and use: 📁 `tests/fixtures`

### 4. Build an enhanced version of anchor-cli that supports code coverage for Anchor programs:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/LimeChain/anchor
cd anchor && cargo build
```

### 5. Build an enhanced version of LiteSVM that supports code coverage:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/LimeChain/litesvm
cd litesvm/crates/node-litesvm && yarn && yarn build
```

Finally in order for the Typescript tests to use the enhanced version of LiteSVM we've just built,
create a symbolic link to it at the root directory of the anchor workspace:

```bash
ln -s path/to/enhanced/litesvm/crates/node-litesvm/litesvm local-litesvm
```

## Getting started 🚀

Add your program and third-party programs to test coverage in your test file:

```typescript
// Be sure to use the enhanced LiteSVM
import {
  FailedTransactionMetadata,
  LiteSVM,
  TransactionMetadata,
} from "../local-litesvm";

// In your test file
describe("your_program", () => {
  before(async () => {
    // ... other setup code ...

    // LiteSVM setup
    svm.addProgramFromFile(programID, "target/deploy/your_program.so");
    svm.addProgramFromFile(
      thirdPartyProgramID,
      "tests/fixtures/third_party.so"
    ); // Add third party programs (if any)

    // Enable coverage tracking
    svm.withCoverage(
      [["your_program", programID.toBuffer()]],
      [["third_party", thirdPartyProgramID.toBuffer()]],
      payer.secretKey // add payer
    );
  });
  // ... your tests ...
});
```

## Generate test coverage report:

`RUST_BACKTRACE=1 RUST_LOG=info path/to/enhanced/anchor/target/debug/anchor coverage`

Supported environment variables that anchor-cli will interpret if user is willing to specify the path to specific tools used for code coverage generation:

```bash
LLVM_COV=llvm-cov-19 # default: llvm-cov
LLVM_PROFDATA=llvm-profdata-19 # default: llvm-profdata
HTML_VIEWER=/bin/true # default: open
```

## Example

The current repo showcases a simple vault program with code coverage enabled.<br/>
To test it create the symbolic link to the enhanced liteSVM ([step 5](#5-build-an-enhanced-version-of-litesvm-that-supports-code-coverage)) and generate the coverage with the enhanced Anchor CLI ([step 4](#4-build-an-enhanced-version-of-anchor-cli-that-supports-code-coverage-for-anchor-programs) and [Coverage section](#generate-test-coverage-report)).
Also be sure to have everything from the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) section installed.

Commit message:

It seems that if we clone litesvm inside the anchor-coverage-example clone directory tests fail to start. Before investigating it further put this in the README provided someone also stumbles into this issue. Mind that when creating the litesvm symlink it's best to use full path.
Thanks Jonas Hahn @ Solana for having the time to report this one.

README.md, after:

# Adding Code Coverage to Anchor Programs 🎯

This guide explains how to set up code coverage analysis for your Anchor program. 📊

## Prerequisites

Install llvm (preferably version 19+)

Ubuntu

```bash
sudo apt install llvm
```

MacOS

```bash
brew install llvm
```

## Setup Steps 🛠️

### 1. Add the solana-coverage crate to your program: 📦

```bash
cd programs/your_program
cargo add solana-coverage
```

### 2. Modify your program's `lib.rs` to include the coverage macro: 🔧

```rust
#[cfg(not(target_os = "solana"))]
mod coverage {
    use super::*;
    use anchor_lang::solana_program::{
        entrypoint::ProgramResult,
        program_stubs::{set_syscall_stubs, SyscallStubs},
    };
    solana_coverage::anchor_coverage!();
}

#[program]
pub mod my_anchor_program {
...
}
```

### 3. [OPTIONAL] For third-party program binaries (if using CPI) create (if missing) and use: 📁 `tests/fixtures`

### 4. Build an enhanced version of anchor-cli that supports code coverage for Anchor programs:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/LimeChain/anchor
cd anchor && cargo build
```

### 5. Build an enhanced version of LiteSVM that supports code coverage:

Don't clone litesvm inside the anchor-coverage-example clone directory. Please clone it outside of it as this may break tests.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/LimeChain/litesvm
cd litesvm/crates/node-litesvm && yarn && yarn build
```

Finally in order for the Typescript tests to use the enhanced version of LiteSVM we've just built,
create a symbolic link to it at the root directory of the anchor workspace. Be sure to use full path:

```bash
ln -s /path/to/enhanced/litesvm/crates/node-litesvm/litesvm local-litesvm
```

## Getting started 🚀

Add your program and third-party programs to test coverage in your test file:

```typescript
// Be sure to use the enhanced LiteSVM
import {
  FailedTransactionMetadata,
  LiteSVM,
  TransactionMetadata,
} from "../local-litesvm";

// In your test file
describe("your_program", () => {
  before(async () => {
    // ... other setup code ...

    // LiteSVM setup
    svm.addProgramFromFile(programID, "target/deploy/your_program.so");
    svm.addProgramFromFile(
      thirdPartyProgramID,
      "tests/fixtures/third_party.so"
    ); // Add third party programs (if any)

    // Enable coverage tracking
    svm.withCoverage(
      [["your_program", programID.toBuffer()]],
      [["third_party", thirdPartyProgramID.toBuffer()]],
      payer.secretKey // add payer
    );
  });
  // ... your tests ...
});
```

## Generate test coverage report:

`RUST_BACKTRACE=1 RUST_LOG=info path/to/enhanced/anchor/target/debug/anchor coverage`

Supported environment variables that anchor-cli will interpret if user is willing to specify the path to specific tools used for code coverage generation:

```bash
LLVM_COV=llvm-cov-19 # default: llvm-cov
LLVM_PROFDATA=llvm-profdata-19 # default: llvm-profdata
HTML_VIEWER=/bin/true # default: open
```

## Example

The current repo showcases a simple vault program with code coverage enabled.<br/>
To test it create the symbolic link to the enhanced liteSVM ([step 5](#5-build-an-enhanced-version-of-litesvm-that-supports-code-coverage)) and generate the coverage with the enhanced Anchor CLI ([step 4](#4-build-an-enhanced-version-of-anchor-cli-that-supports-code-coverage-for-anchor-programs) and [Coverage section](#generate-test-coverage-report)).
Also be sure to have everything from the [Prerequisites](#prerequisites) section installed.
